docs/firmware-and-testing.rst, before:

.. _firmware-and-testing:

4. Software and Firmware Install
================================
We are now ready to start installing software on our board, over the USB
connection. For this, you will need a Mac, Linux PC, or Windows PC.
We have only tested the firmware procedure on Mac and Linux, so those
systems are recommended. However, others have successfully installed MicroPython
from Windows, so it should work.

In the instructions that follow, we will use the term "host computer" to mean
your PC/Mac/Linux box and "ESP8266" to mean the ESP8266-based system you have
assembled on the breadboard.

Software Prerequisites
----------------------
Python
~~~~~~
On your host computer, you will need an installation of Python 3, version 3.4
or later. As described below, you will be adding a few packages to your Python
install. Rather than add these packages to your system-wide Python install, we
recommend installing them into a *virtual environment*. See the Python
`documentation page for venv <https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html>`_
for details.

Erasing and flashing the firmware is done through a utility called
``esptool.py`` [#]_. You can install it via ``pip`` with the command::

  pip install --upgrade esptool

If ``pip`` on your system defaults to Python 2, then use ``pip3`` instead.

We will also use ``mpfshell``, a shell-like utility for moving files between the
ESP8266 and the host computer. [#]_ It is available on GitHub: https://github.com/wendlers/mpfshell.
Download or clone the mpfshell repository and follow the instructions in the
README.md file to install.

We will use the ThingFlow framework for writing some of the software running on
the ESP8266. Please download or clone the ThingFlow repository on GitHub:
https://github.com/mpi-sws-rse/thingflow-python. Note that we will not be using
the packaged version of ThingFlow available on pypi.python.org. That version is only for
the standard CPython implementation. We will be using the code in the
``micropython`` subdirectory of the ThingFlow source tree.

MicroPython Firmware
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
You can download the latest version of the MicroPython firmware for ESP8266 from
here: http://micropython.org/download#esp8266. You will want the latest stable
firmware version [#]_. Since the name of the firmware file will change over time,
we will refer to it as ``esp8266-YYYYMMDD-vX.Y.Z.bin`` in any commands. Just substitute
with name of your image file.

Mac-specific
~~~~~~~~~~~~
If you are using a Mac, you will need to download a USB to UART bridge driver
from Silicon Labs. This will allow your Mac to send serial communications for the
Silicon Labs USB adapter chip on your ESP8266 board. The driver is available from
their website: https://www.silabs.com/products/mcu/Pages/USBtoUARTBridgeVCPDrivers.aspx

For interacting with the Python REPL running on the ESP8266, you will use the
``screen`` program. It comes pre-installed on MacOS.

Linux-specific
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
You should not need any drivers for the serial connection. You will want to add
your user to the ``dialout`` group so it can access the tty device for the serial
connection. Replacing ``MYUSER`` with your user id, the command is::

  sudo adduser MYUSER dialout

We will be using the GNU ``screen`` program to interact with the Python REPL
running on the ESP8266. If it is not already installed, you will need to do so.
If you are running a Debian-based distribution (Debian, Ubuntu, Raspbian), then
you can install it via::

  sudo apt-get install screen

Windows-specific
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
You will need the ``PuTTY`` program to interact with the Python REPL running
on the ESP8266. It is free and available at http://www.putty.org.

As stated above, we have not attempted this process with a Windows host. We
suggest that you follow the instructions here: http://www.instructables.com/id/The-Super-Easy-Micropython-ESP8266-Guide-No-Guessw/?ALLSTEPS.

The rest of the instructions below are for Mac and Linux. You should be able to
follow along using the Instructables guide as a reference. You will use ``PuTTY``
instead of ``screen``. Of course, the command options will be slightly
different.

Testing Your Connection
-----------------------
With the prerequisite software installed, you can now connect your ESP8266 and
verify that it can talk to your host system. Using the microUSB to USB cable,
plug it into the USB port. Now, look for a new serial tty device in your
``/dev`` directory. On Mac, it should be called ``/dev/tty.SLAB_USBtoUART``.
On Linux, it should be called ``/dev/ttyUSB0``. The device will only be
present when your ESP8266 board is plugged in.

Now, run ``screen`` as follows (substituting ``TTYDEVICE`` with ``ttyUSB0`` or
``tty.SLAB_USBtoUART``)::

  screen /dev/TTYDEVICE 115200

The ``115200`` is the baud rate. Now, press the reset key. You should see some
characters, either a prompt or some garbage. If you get garbage, you might
try a baud rate of 9600. Do not be worried at this point if you only see garbage,
we are going to rewrite the firmware anyway. As long as you saw the tty device,
you should be OK.

Now, unplug your USB cable and run the ``reset`` command in your terminal
session. You are ready to install the firmware.

Installing the Firmware and Testing the REPL
--------------------------------------------
We will use ``esptool.py`` to erase the old firmware and install the latest
version of MicroPython [#]_. Plug your ESP8266 back into the USB port and run
the following from the command line::

  esptool.py --port /dev/TTYDEVICE erase_flash

Now, install the new firmware with the following (substituting in the device name
and MicroPython image file name)::

  esptool.py --port /dev/TTDEVICE --baud 460800 write_flash \
  --flash_size=detect --verify -fm dio 0 esp8266-YYYYMMDD-vX.Y.Z.bin

If this step fails, you might try lowering the baud rate (e.g. from 460800
to 115200).

Next, we will use ``screen`` to connect to our board. From the command line::

  screen /dev/TTYDEVICE 115200

Now, press the reset button on your ESP8266 board [#]_. In your ``screen`` session,
you should see some garbage characters followed by a version string and a
prompt. For example:

  .. image:: _static/micropython_version_prompt.png


You should now be able to type Python code in at the prompt::

  >>> print("Hello, world")
  Hello, world
  >>>

Congratulations, you have MicroPython running on your ESP8266! If you had
problems, you might try looking at the troubleshooting hints provided in
the MicroPython documentation [#]_.

Next, let's write an :ref:`application <thingflow-application>` for our board.
  
.. [#] https://pypi.python.org/pypi/esptool/1.3

.. [#] MicroPython has a web-based interface for transferring files
       over the WiFi network. However, we have seen some problems with using it
       and recommend using ``mpfshell``

.. [#] At the time this is being written, the latest stable version is 1.8.7,
       and the firmware image filename is
       ``esp8266-20170108-v1.8.7.bin``.

.. [#] You can also find instructions for this in the MicroPython documentation.
       The relevant section is at
       https://docs.micropython.org/en/latest/esp8266/esp8266/tutorial/intro.html

.. [#] On both the NodeMCU and Adafruit boards, the reset button is labeled
       "RST". You can use this button to force a reboot of the system. This is
       useful to get it to a known state (recommended after plugging into the USB
       connection).

.. [#] https://docs.micropython.org/en/latest/esp8266/esp8266/tutorial/intro.html#troubleshooting-installation-problems

Commit message:

Add key combination to exit the screen and mpfshell programs

docs/firmware-and-testing.rst, after:

.. _firmware-and-testing:

4. Software and Firmware Install
================================
We are now ready to start installing software on our board, over the USB
connection. For this, you will need a Mac, Linux PC, or Windows PC.
We have only tested the firmware procedure on Mac and Linux, so those
systems are recommended. However, others have successfully installed MicroPython
from Windows, so it should work.

In the instructions that follow, we will use the term "host computer" to mean
your PC/Mac/Linux box and "ESP8266" to mean the ESP8266-based system you have
assembled on the breadboard.

Software Prerequisites
----------------------
Python
~~~~~~
On your host computer, you will need an installation of Python 3, version 3.4
or later. As described below, you will be adding a few packages to your Python
install. Rather than add these packages to your system-wide Python install, we
recommend installing them into a *virtual environment*. See the Python
`documentation page for venv <https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html>`_
for details.

Erasing and flashing the firmware is done through a utility called
``esptool.py`` [#]_. You can install it via ``pip`` with the command::

  pip install --upgrade esptool

If ``pip`` on your system defaults to Python 2, then use ``pip3`` instead.

We will also use ``mpfshell``, a shell-like utility for moving files between the
ESP8266 and the host computer. [#]_ It is available on GitHub: https://github.com/wendlers/mpfshell.
Download or clone the mpfshell repository and follow the instructions in the
README.md file to install.

We will use the ThingFlow framework for writing some of the software running on
the ESP8266. Please download or clone the ThingFlow repository on GitHub:
https://github.com/mpi-sws-rse/thingflow-python. Note that we will not be using
the packaged version of ThingFlow available on pypi.python.org. That version is only for
the standard CPython implementation. We will be using the code in the
``micropython`` subdirectory of the ThingFlow source tree.

MicroPython Firmware
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
You can download the latest version of the MicroPython firmware for ESP8266 from
here: http://micropython.org/download#esp8266. You will want the latest stable
firmware version [#]_. Since the name of the firmware file will change over time,
we will refer to it as ``esp8266-YYYYMMDD-vX.Y.Z.bin`` in any commands. Just substitute
with name of your image file.

Mac-specific
~~~~~~~~~~~~
If you are using a Mac, you will need to download a USB to UART bridge driver
from Silicon Labs. This will allow your Mac to send serial communications for the
Silicon Labs USB adapter chip on your ESP8266 board. The driver is available from
their website: https://www.silabs.com/products/mcu/Pages/USBtoUARTBridgeVCPDrivers.aspx

For interacting with the Python REPL running on the ESP8266, you will use the
``screen`` program. It comes pre-installed on MacOS.

Linux-specific
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
You should not need any drivers for the serial connection. You will want to add
your user to the ``dialout`` group so it can access the tty device for the serial
connection. Replacing ``MYUSER`` with your user id, the command is::

  sudo adduser MYUSER dialout

We will be using the GNU ``screen`` program to interact with the Python REPL
running on the ESP8266. If it is not already installed, you will need to do so.
If you are running a Debian-based distribution (Debian, Ubuntu, Raspbian), then
you can install it via::

  sudo apt-get install screen

Windows-specific
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
You will need the ``PuTTY`` program to interact with the Python REPL running
on the ESP8266. It is free and available at http://www.putty.org.

As stated above, we have not attempted this process with a Windows host. We
suggest that you follow the instructions here: http://www.instructables.com/id/The-Super-Easy-Micropython-ESP8266-Guide-No-Guessw/?ALLSTEPS.

The rest of the instructions below are for Mac and Linux. You should be able to
follow along using the Instructables guide as a reference. You will use ``PuTTY``
instead of ``screen``. Of course, the command options will be slightly
different.

Testing Your Connection
-----------------------
With the prerequisite software installed, you can now connect your ESP8266 and
verify that it can talk to your host system. Using the microUSB to USB cable,
plug it into the USB port. Now, look for a new serial tty device in your
``/dev`` directory. On Mac, it should be called ``/dev/tty.SLAB_USBtoUART``.
On Linux, it should be called ``/dev/ttyUSB0``. The device will only be
present when your ESP8266 board is plugged in.

Now, run ``screen`` as follows (substituting ``TTYDEVICE`` with ``ttyUSB0`` or
``tty.SLAB_USBtoUART``)::

  screen /dev/TTYDEVICE 115200

The ``115200`` is the baud rate. Now, press the reset key. You should see some
characters, either a prompt or some garbage. If you get garbage, you might
try a baud rate of 9600. Do not be worried at this point if you only see garbage,
we are going to rewrite the firmware anyway. As long as you saw the tty device,
you should be OK.

Now, exit ``screen`` (pressing Control-A k and then "y"), and run the ``reset``
command in your terminal session. You are ready to install the firmware.

Installing the Firmware and Testing the REPL
--------------------------------------------
We will use ``esptool.py`` to erase the old firmware and install the latest
version of MicroPython [#]_. Plug your ESP8266 back into the USB port and run
the following from the command line::

  esptool.py --port /dev/TTYDEVICE erase_flash

Now, install the new firmware with the following (substituting in the device name
and MicroPython image file name)::

  esptool.py --port /dev/TTDEVICE --baud 460800 write_flash \
  --flash_size=detect --verify -fm dio 0 esp8266-YYYYMMDD-vX.Y.Z.bin

If this step fails, you might try lowering the baud rate (e.g. from 460800
to 115200).

Next, we will use ``screen`` to connect to our board. From the command line::

  screen /dev/TTYDEVICE 115200

Now, press the reset button on your ESP8266 board [#]_. In your ``screen`` session,
you should see some garbage characters followed by a version string and a
prompt. For example:

  .. image:: _static/micropython_version_prompt.png


You should now be able to type Python code in at the prompt::

  >>> print("Hello, world")
  Hello, world
  >>>

Congratulations, you have MicroPython running on your ESP8266! If you had
problems, you might try looking at the troubleshooting hints provided in
the MicroPython documentation [#]_.

Next, let's write an :ref:`application <thingflow-application>` for our board.
  
.. [#] https://pypi.python.org/pypi/esptool/1.3

.. [#] MicroPython has a web-based interface for transferring files
       over the WiFi network. However, we have seen some problems with using it
       and recommend using ``mpfshell``

.. [#] At the time this is being written, the latest stable version is 1.8.7,
       and the firmware image filename is
       ``esp8266-20170108-v1.8.7.bin``.

.. [#] You can also find instructions for this in the MicroPython documentation.
       The relevant section is at
       https://docs.micropython.org/en/latest/esp8266/esp8266/tutorial/intro.html

.. [#] On both the NodeMCU and Adafruit boards, the reset button is labeled
       "RST". You can use this button to force a reboot of the system. This is
       useful to get it to a known state (recommended after plugging into the USB
       connection).

.. [#] https://docs.micropython.org/en/latest/esp8266/esp8266/tutorial/intro.html#troubleshooting-installation-problems
