docs/index.rst, before:

.. Micropython IoT Hackathon documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Mon Dec 26 20:48:32 2016.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

MicroPython IoT Hackathon, featuring the ESP8266
================================================

**Abstract:**

Due in large part to the availability of cheap, low-power, internet-connected
microcontrollers, the Internet of Things is taking off. Python developers can
get in on the excitement with MicroPython, an implementation of Python 3 that
runs on very small devices with no operating system. MicroPython provides
the standard Python REPL (read-eval-print-loop) interface, so you can
interactively develop and debug applications on these small devices.

This document provides instructions for a hackathon/class centered around
MicroPython. In the class, students will learn some basic electronics, wire
up some sensors to a low-power wireless controller board (based on the ESP8266
microcontroller), load the MicroPython firmware, and interactively write simple
applications to read from the sensors. It also discusses how to connect to
other systems via the MQTT messaging protocol and exchange ideas on larger
projects that can be built at home for low cost with beginner-level knowledge.

This was original created for use at a San Francisco Python Project Night
meetup. It is designed to be reusable for other classes as well as for
individual study.

**Contents:**

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   intro
   parts-and-tools
   hardware-assembly
   firmware-and-testing
   thingflow-application
   mqtt
   projects
   teachers-notes
   quick_installation.rst

Copyright and License
---------------------
Copyright 2016, 2017 by Jeffrey Fischer.

This document is made available under a Creative Commons
`Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 (CC BY-SA 4.0) license <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/>`__.
This allows you to remix, transform, and distribute the content, provided you
cite the original authors and provide your content under the same license as
the original.

Example code and any other software in the
`associated repository <https://github.com/jfischer/micropython-iot-hackathon>`__
is made available under the MIT License. This allows you to reuse the examples,
with very few restrictions.


Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`

Commit message:

Bump up version; add acknowledgements - fixes #10

docs/index.rst, after:

>.. Micropython IoT Hackathon documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Mon Dec 26 20:48:32 2016.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

MicroPython IoT Hackathon, featuring the ESP8266
================================================

**Abstract:**

Due in large part to the availability of cheap, low-power, internet-connected
microcontrollers, the Internet of Things is taking off. Python developers can
get in on the excitement with MicroPython, an implementation of Python 3 that
runs on very small devices with no operating system. MicroPython provides
the standard Python REPL (read-eval-print-loop) interface, so you can
interactively develop and debug applications on these small devices.

This document provides instructions for a hackathon/class centered around
MicroPython. In the class, students will learn some basic electronics, wire
up some sensors to a low-power wireless controller board (based on the ESP8266
microcontroller), load the MicroPython firmware, and interactively write simple
applications to read from the sensors. It also discusses how to connect to
other systems via the MQTT messaging protocol and exchange ideas on larger
projects that can be built at home for low cost with beginner-level knowledge.

This was original created for use at a San Francisco Python Project Night
meetup. It is designed to be reusable for other classes as well as for
individual study.

**Contents:**

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   intro
   parts-and-tools
   hardware-assembly
   firmware-and-testing
   thingflow-application
   mqtt
   projects
   teachers-notes
   quick_installation.rst

Copyright and License
---------------------
Copyright 2016, 2017 by Jeffrey Fischer and contributers.

This document is made available under a Creative Commons
`Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 (CC BY-SA 4.0) license <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/>`__.
This allows you to remix, transform, and distribute the content, provided you
cite the original authors and provide your content under the same license as
the original.

Example code and any other software in the
`associated repository <https://github.com/jfischer/micropython-iot-hackathon>`__
is made available under the MIT License. This allows you to reuse the examples,
with very few restrictions.

Acknowledgements
----------------
The following people have contributed to this repository (listed in
chronological order):

* Jeff Fischer
* Simeon Franklin
* Eric Theise
* Daniel Mizyrycki

We thank all the contributers for their help! Thank you also to
those who have participated in or facilitated past IoT Hackathons.


Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`
